Tigers NFL Draft hopefuls

Six other former Missouri football players could get selected in the NFL Draft this weekend:
Sheldon Richardson, DT: Richardson, who is foregoing his senior year at Missouri to enter the draft, is widely expected to be taken in the first round on Thursday. Richardson was dominant in the middle of the Tigers' defense last season and finished with 75 tackles. Scouts Inc., which released a full seven-round Mock Draft on Wednesday, projects Richardson as the 18th overall pick to the Dallas Cowboys.
Zaviar Gooden, LB: After a good senior season, Gooden caught the attention of scouts with strong performances at the NFL Combine in February and Missouri's pro day in March. Scouts Inc. projects Gooden as the second pick of the fifth round, 135th overall, to the Jacksonville Jaguars.
T.J. Moe, WR: Although he's very popular among Missouri fans, Moe's short stature and lack of break-away speed doesn't make him attractive to NFL scouts. He was able to find a niche and be productive during his four years as a Tiger, catching 92 passes in 2010 as a sophomore. Moe was invited to the NFL Combine in February, but Scouts Inc. does not project him to be drafted this weekend.
Kip Edwards, CB: Edwards, who is Gooden's cousin, was not invited to the NFL Combine, but had a strong showing at Missouri's pro day last month. Edwards was a two-year starter for the Tigers and has NFL-caliber size, but Scouts Inc. does not project him being drafted.
Brad Madison, DE: Madison was converted from offensive line to defensive line before his freshman season, and the move paid dividends when Madison had 7.5 sacks in 2010 as a sophomore. Injuries hampered Madison during his junior year, and he never reached the same level of production. Scouts Inc. does not project him to be drafted this weekend.
Kendial Lawrence, RB: Lawrence was Missouri's most productive running back last season after the Tigers lost starter Henry Josey to a knee injury. He was not expected to be on many draft boards, but has met with a few teams. Scouts Inc. does not project him being drafted.

