progress01.jpg: Cranes rise above downtown Columbia. Growth is beginning to stretch the fragile fabric of the city's aging infrastructure and how the city will fund repairs and renovations largely remains unclear.   ¦  BREANNE BRADLEY



ernies01.jpg: Nathan Fuchs greets customers as they walk into Ernie's Cafe & Steak House on Walnut Street. Fuchs has been manager at the cafe for nine years.   |  Harry Katz

ernies02.jpg: Nathan Fuchs, center, talks to Luke Tudball, left, and Heather Vagnall at Ernie's Cafe & Steak House on March 8. Fuchs greets customers and regulars to the restaurant.

ernies03.jpg: Nathan Fuchs, right, helps 14-year-old Rachel Spurling with her math homework after the lunch rush at Ernie's Cafe & Steak House on March 8. Rachel's father, Tom Spurling, owns the longstanding Columbia diner.   |  Harry Katz

ernies04.jpg: The atmosphere of Ernie's Cafe & Steak House on Walnut Street is essentially the same today as it was when the restaurant started in 1934. It moved to Walnut Street from the city's north side in 1946.   |  Harry Katz


teacher01.jpg: Beth Newton helps her students Josh Bennett and Keishawn Samuels-Chappell set up iMovie on an iPad to record their experiment step-by-step in a March 6 class at Oakland Junior High School. Newton has been using new technology, including iPads, to increase student learning.   ¦  PETER MAREK

teacher02.jpg: Student Ericka Bullock walks through her science experiment step-by-step, while her partner Mytsy Perez records her on an iPad on March 6 at Oakland Junior High School. Their teacher, Beth Newton, has been using new technologies to improve student learning.    ¦  PETER MAREK

farmer01.jpg: Zach Shaw gets barbed wire from his truck to be used for a new fence March 12 at his family's farm north of Columbia. Shaw and his father are building a fence at the edge of their property to contain their cattle. The Boone County Regional Sewer District is taking 20 acres of the Shaw's farmland to build a water treatment plant.   |  Ben Walton

farmer02.jpg: Jim Shaw, left, and his son, Zach, work on a fence on their farm just north of Columbia. Because of the population boom in Columbia, the Shaws' have to give up some of their land for a water treatment plant. The fence they are building will separate the farm from the other property.   |  Ben Walton

farmer03.jpg: Zach Shaw, left, and his father, Jim Shaw, attach barbed wire to a metal post to form a fence. Jim Shaw is determined to maintain a rural lifestyle on the family farm he has worked for a lifetime to preserve despite new developments surrounding the land.   |  Ben Walton
